---
layout: post
title: 20 years
strapline: Designing for the web since 1999
full-title: 20 years designing for the web
tags: web webmaster javascript html broadband flash
---

This month marks twenty years since I started designing for the web. Back in May 1999, the peak of my front-end development was pasting [mouse trail effects from Dynamic Drive](http://dynamicdrive.com/dynamicindex13/kisstrail.htm). My first client site two years later used [Frontpage Express](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_FrontPage) to colour in table cells in a calendar. It would be five years before I got a mobile phone and attempted a special [mobile WAP page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wireless_Application_Protocol).  

The early years were an era of wild, colourful creativity, constrained only by the 640 by 480 pixels of the monitor (I.E. 4.0 highly recommended). I was a webmaster, master of your Personal Website and available at [cool.dude@cheerful.com](mailto:cool.due@cheerful.com). Your homepage would be painstakingly submitted to the leading search engines Lycos and Excite. My first contract charged an extra £1.50 for each additional page you wanted. A contact form was only available if your ISP gave you a cgi-bin folder. 

It was also an era before broadband, which arrived in our village in 2003. I built the site for my Dad to muster the 250 petition votes for BT to upgrade our exchange speed by ten times, to 512kps. Shortly afterwards I discovered Macromedia Flash and an explosion of half-finished interactive games followed. Snail betting is still as compelling today as it was in 2004.

The content and technologies behind the web will always evolve; I talk less about Lego, Pokémon and James Bond these days. But as a platform for expression, experimentation and creative exploration, I don’t believe the web has really changed much.
In twenty years’ time, I hope I’m still having as much fun online as I was twenty years ago. 
